---
title: "FRESNEL'S PRIZE MEMOIR ON THE DIPFRACTION OF LIGHT"
date: 2023-05-30
weight: 30
description: ""
author: "Fresnel"
# image: /covers/freud.jpg
---



[The Introduction, covering fourteen pages and describing in the most general, way the defects of the emission-theory and some
of the merits of the wave-theory, is omitted.]

SECTION I 

11. The emission -theory shows the phenomena of shadows, especially when the source of light is merely a point.

But, on the contrary, nothing is more complicated. 

If we suppose the surface of the body producing the shadow to be endowed with a repulsive property capable \>f changing the direction of rays of light passing very near it, we should then expect only to see the shadows increase in size and, towards their edges, to blend a little with the illuminated area; while, as a matter of fact, they are bordered with three very distinct colored fringes when one employs white light, and with a still greater numberof bright and- dark bands when one uses light which is practically homogeneous. 

These fringes we shall call exterior, and those which are observed in the midst of very narrow shadowswe shall call interior fringes. 

A Newtonian will explain that the exterior fringes are produced by a force which is alternately attractive and repulsive. This force is sourced in the surface of the body producing the shadows. 

The Newtonian theory are not justified by experiment.


12. We know that the effect of a magnifying-glass placed in front of the eye is to reproduce accurately upon the retina anyobject or image which is located at its conjugate focus ; at least F 81

this is the case whenever all the rays which go to make up theimage are incident upon the surface of the glass. In place,then, of projecting the fringes upon a white card or a groundglass, one may observe them directly with a magnifyingglass, and he then sees them as they are at its focus.  

Onehas then only to look towards the luminous point and placethe glass between his eye and the opaque body in such a waythat the point where the refracted rays cross each other fallsin the middle of the pupil ; this position is recognized by thefact that the entire surface of the magnifying-glass appears tobe filled with light. This method is much preferable to theother two in that it enables us to study conveniently phenomena of diffraction in a weak light, and has, at the same time,the further advantage of allowing us to follow the exteriorfringes right up to their source. Using a lens of 2 mm. focusand light which is practically homogeneous, I have been ableto follow these fringes very close to their origin and yet ob-serve the dark band of the fifth order. The interval which sep-arates this band from the edge of the shadow I have measuredon the micrometer and find it to be less than 0.015 mm., whilethe first three fringes are comprised within a space not exceed0.01 mm. ; by using a lens of shorter focus, one would doubtless still further diminish this distance. We may thus regardthe dark and bright bands as beginning at the very edge of theopaque body, so long as we do not push the accuracy of ourmeasures beyond the hundredth part of a millimeter an ac-curacy which proves to be sufficient, and which it is difficult toexceed except when the fringes are somewhat larger, as is thecase with those most frequently observed.

13. This point established, suppose that we measure the exterior fringes at any given distance from the [opaque] screenand then allow the luminous point to approach ; the fringesare observed to grow much larger. Meanwhile the angle whichthe incident ray passing through the origin of the fringes makeswith the tangent drawn from the luminous point to the edge ofthe screen will be almost zero. And since these fringes taketheir rise at a distance less than 0.01 mm. from the edge, thevariation of this angle would not be able to sensibly affect thesize of the fringes. To explain this enlargement, we must there-fore assume that the repulsive force increases in proportion asthe opaque body approaches the luminous point. But this is82

impossible, for the intensity of this force can evidently dependonly upon the distance at which the light corpuscle passes theopaque body, upon the size and form of the surface of this body, upon its density, mass, or nature ; and by hypothesis
these all remain constant. But even if we suppose the origin of the dark and bright
bands to lie at a greater distance from the edge of the screen, a supposition which would explain the fact that they growlarger in proportion as one approaches the luminous point, it
is still impossible to make the results of experiment agree withthe formula deduced from the [Newtonian] hypothesis whichwe are here discussing.

14. The following table gives the distance between the darkest point in the dark band of the fourth order and the edge of the geometrical shadow* for different distances of the opaquebody from the luminous point. These measures have beentaken with a micrometer eye-piece which carries in its focal plane a silk fibre, the whoje being moved by a micrometerscrew. By the aid of a head divided into one hundred parts,
passing an index, fixed with reference to the screw, one is able to read the displacement of the silk thread to withinabout 0.01 mm.

mitting only the red rays and a small portion of the orange rays.One might obtain more homogeneous light by use of a prism,but he would not be so certain as to its identity in the variousobservations a condition which it is very necessary to satisfy.15. Let us represent by a and b the respective distances ofthe opaque body from the luminous point and from the micrometer ; let d be the distance from the edge of the body tothe origin of the dark band of the fourth order, and r the tan-gent of the small angle of inflection resulting from the actionof the repulsive forces. We then have the following expression*for the distance between the edge of the geometrical shadowand the darkest point in the dark band :
Now since r and d remain constant whatever be the distancesof the luminous point from the opaque body and from the micrometer respectively, two observations suffice to determinetheir value. Combining the first and the last observations, wefind fl? = 0.5019 mm. and r = 1.8164. We are thus compelled tosuppose that at its origin the dark band of the fourth order is distant one -half a millimeter from the edge of the opaquebody. If, now, we substitute these values in the formula andapply it to the intermediate observations, we obtain the follow-ing values, several of which evidently differ widely from theresults of experiment.
*
[In diagram S is luminous point, O is edge of opaque body, A is edge ofgeometrical shadow, O' is origin of dark band offourth (or any) order. HenceAr> . d(a-\-b) AB is --- ; anda
the centre of the darkband is a distancebr farther, whereA.C = br. The unitwhich Fresnel hereemploys for r is evidently one hundred times smaller than that in which weordinarily express natural tangents.'] 84
THE WAVE-THEORY OF
No. of Observation


fringes are larger, the measures should be less accurate ; but in repeating them several times I find variations which at mostamount to three or four hundredths of a millimeter. Evensupposing that there were an error of one-half a millimeter in
this measure, it would produce only a difference of 0.13 mm.at a distance of 1.003 m. ; so that experiment shows conclusively that the exterior fringes lie on curved lines with their convex side outwards.
The following table gives these trajectories, referred to their chords, for different series of observations, in each of whichthe distance of the opaque body from the luminous point re- mains constant. In the fourth series I suppose first that thechord joins the two extreme readings, and next I suppose it to be drawn from the edge of the opaque body itself where thedeviation of the fringes from their origin is, as we have alreadyseen, very small. In the other series the chord joins the edgeof the opaque body and the point most distant from it.
Lance
from
lunous
point
to
aque
screen,
the
value
ofa

4-TH SERIES referred to the chord joining the extreme readings


of light produce upon one another. Recently the distinguished Dr. Thomas Young has shown by a simple and ingeniousexperiment that the interior fringes are produced by the meeting of rays inflected at each side of the opaque body. Thishe proved by using a screen to intercept one of the two pencils of light; and in this way lie was able to make the interiorfringes completely vanish, whatever might be the form, mass,or nature of the screen, and whether he intercepted the lu-minous pencil before or after its passage into the shadow.
18. Brighter and sharper fringes may be produced by cut-ting two parallel slits close together in a piece of cardboardor a sheet of metal, and placing the screen thus prepared infront of the luminous point. We may then observe, by useof a magnifying -glass between the opaque body and the eye,that the shadow is filled with a large number of very sharpcolored fringes so long as the light shines through both openings at the same time, but these disappear whenever the lightis cut off from one of the slits. 19. If we allow two pencils of light, each coming from thesame source and regularly reflected by two metallic mirrors,to meet under a very small angle, we obtain similar fringes,the colors of which are even purer and more brilliant thanbefore. To obtain these bands, it is necessary to be very care-ful that in the region where the two mirrors come into contact, or at least throughout a portion of their line of contact,,the surface of the one is not shifted sensibly past that of theother. This is necessary in order that the difference of pathtraversed by two reflected rays meeting in the area commonto the two luminous* fields may be very small. I may re-mark in passing that the theory of interference alone will* In the case of white light, or even in light as homogeneous as possible, the number of fringes which one can see is always limited, because evenwhen the light has reached a degree of simplicity as great as possiblewithout too far diminishing its intensity, it is still composed of rays whichare heterogeneous; and since the bright and dark bands thus produced donot all have the same size, they encroach the one upon the other in pro-portion as their order increases, and finally they completely destroy eachother ; and this is why one does not see any fringes when the differenceof paths becomes slightly sensible. Concerning the details of this ex-periment and its explanation on the principle of interference, see the arti- cle upon Light in the French translation of Thomson's Chemistry, alreadycited.


explain this experiment, and that the experiment calls formanipulation so delicate and effort so continued that it is almost impossible that one should strike upon it by accident.
If we raise one of the mirrors or intercept the light which it reflects either before or after reflection, the fringes disappearas in the preceding case. This furnishes still further evidencethat the fringes are produced, not by the action of the edgesof the mirrors, but by the meeting of two pencils of light.For these fringes are always at right angles to the line whichjoins the two images of the luminous point, whatever be its inclination with respect to these edges, at least throughout theextent of the area which is common to the two regularly re-flected pencils.*
20. Since the fringes which one sees in the interior ofthe shadow of a very narrow body and those which one obtains by the use of two mirrors result evidently from the mutual influence of rays of light, analogy would indicate that thesame thing ought to be true for the exterior fringes of theshadows of bodies illuminated by a point source. The first explanation which occurs to one is that these fringes are pro-duced by the interference of direct rays with those which arereflected at the edge of the opaque body, while the interiorfringes result from the combined action of rays inflected intothe shadow from the two sides of the opaque body, these in-flected rays having their origin either at the surface or atpoints indefinitely near it. This appears to be the opinion ofMr. Young, and it was at first my o\vn opinion ; but a closerexamination of the phenomena convinced me of its falsity.
Nevertheless, I propose to follow it to its logical conclusionand to state the formula which I have derived in order to facil- itate comparison of this theory with that which I offer as asubstitute. Let R, Fig. 14, be the radiant point, AA' the opaque body, andFT' either a white screen upon which the shadow of this bodyfalls or the focal plane of a magnifying-glass with which the* When the fringes extend outside, all their exterior portions resulting from the meeting of rays regularly reflected by one of the mirrors and raysinflected near the edge of the other should have different directions. If one observes this phenomenon carefully, he will see that the form andposition of the fringes are in each case in accord with the theory of inter- ference.
MEMOIRS ON

fringes are observed. RT and RT' are rays tangent at theedge of the opaque body, T and T' being the limits of the ge-ometrical shadow. Let us indicate bya the distance RB from the luminouspoint to the opaque body, by b the dis-tance BO of the body from the whitescreen, and by c its diameter, AA',which we shall consider very small compared with the distances a and b. Thisassumption is made in order that wemay measure the size of the fringeseither in a plane perpendicular to RTor perpendicular to the line RC,which passes through the middle of theshadow.
With these conventions we shall consider, first, the exterior fringes. Let F be any point on the re-ceiving screen outside the shadow. The difference of pathtraversed by the direct ray, and by the ray reflected at the edgeof the opaque body, and meeting the direct ray at this point,is RA+ AF RF. Let us represent FT by x, and express inseries the values of RF, AR, and AF. Then, if we neglect all terms involving any power of x or of c higher than the second,since they are very small compared with distances a and b, theterms which contain c will disappear and we shall have for thedifference of path traversed


21. If we call X the length of a light-wave, that is to say,the distance between two points in the ether where vibrations of the same kind are occurring at the same time and in thesame sense, then A/2 will be the distance between two ether particles whose velocities of vibration are at any one instantequal but oppositely directed. Thus two trains of waves sepa-rated by an interval equal to X are in perfect accord as to theirvibrations; but when the distance between corresponding pointsis A/2, then their vibrations are directly opposed. Accordingly, the above formula gives for the value of x, corresponding to the centre of the dark band of the first order, the followingvalue : \J
*
'- ; while observation shows that, as a matterv ct of fact, this is the brightest part of the first fringe. On thesame theory, the edge of the geometrical shadow, where thedifference of path vanishes, ought to be brighter than the rest of the fringe, while, as a matter of fact, this is precisely thedarkest region outside the geometrical shadow. In general,
the position of the dark and bright bands deduced from this formula is almost exactly the inverse of that determined byexperiment. This is the first difficulty presented by this theory. To avoid it, we must suppose that the rays reflected at the edge of the screen suffer the loss of half a wave-length;adding A/2 to the difference of path, d, the general expressionbecomes
y
~ a
Replacing d in this formula by A/2, 3 A/2, 5 A/2, 7 A/2, etc., wehave for the values of x corresponding to dark bands of thefirst, second, third, fourth, etc., orders:
/2\b(a + d) /\b(a + b) /Q\b(a+b) . v
- ^r v <r~ V~ ^T-> V~ ^--> etc- These formulae appear to agree fairly well with the observations;however, closer measurements show that the ratios between thesizes of the fringes derived from these expressions are not exactly correct, as we shall see later. 22. I pass now to the consideration of interior fringes pro- duced in the shadow by the meeting of two pencils of light
inflected at A and A'. Let M, Fig. 14, be any point located in the interior of the shadow ; the intensity of the light at this point depends upon the amount of disagreement between thevibrations of the rays AM and A'M, which meet at this point, or upon the difference of path A'M AM. I shall denote by xthe distance MC of the point M from the middle of the shadow,and by d the difference of paths, and hence
Expanding the radicals and neglecting the higher powers of
x, since this quantity is very small compared with b, we have
dcxjb,
91
MEMOIRS ON
or x = bd/c. If in place of d in this expression we substitute successively X/2,3X/2, 5X/2, 7X/2, etc., we obtain the values of x corresponding to dark bands of the first, second, third, fourth, etc.,order, namely,
b\ 3X 5b\ 7#X , 7\~> ~T ' ~T > ~z\ > etc., 2c 2c 2c 2c and consequently for the distance between the middle points oftwo consecutive dark bands, b\/c.
The general expression for n such intervals is, therefore,rib\lc. 23. So long as the extreme fringes are sufficiently distantfrom the edges of the shadow, this formula agrees fairly wellwith experiment ; but when they approach very near or passbeyond the edges, one detects a slight difference betweentheir actual position and that deduced from the formula. Ingeneral, the calculated values are always a little larger thanthe observed. The reason for this I shall show when we cometo the true theory of diffraction. It also follows from thisformula that the size of the interior fringes ought to be entirely independent of the distance, a, of the luminous point fromthe opaque body; this prediction, however, is not completelyverified by experiment, especially when the fringes completelyfill the shadow; their position then varies distinctly with thedistance a. 24. According to the formula
which we have just derived for the exterior fringes, theirposition depends upon a as well as upon b. Experiment showsthat, in fact, their size increases or diminishes according as theopaque body approaches or recedes from the luminous point,and that the ratios between the different sizes of one and thesame fringe deduced from the formula are precisely those givenby observation. But the most remarkable inference from thisformula is that, when a remains constant, the distance of anydark or bright band from the edge of the geometrical shadowis not directly proportional to b as in the case of interiorfringes, but varies in such a way that this band traces out, nota straight line, but a hyperbola of sensible curvature. This is 92
THE WAVE-THEORY OF LIGHT
also confirmed by experiment, as may be seen from the observations given above. Considering the striking agreement of these formulae withexperiment, it is natural to suppose that they are accurate ex-pressions of fact, and therefore natural to attribute any smalldifferences between calculated and observed values to the errorswhich are unavoidable in such delicate measurements.*
But a closer examination of the hypotheses from which theyare derived, and of the inferences derivable from them, showsthat they do not agree with the facts of nature.
25. If the fringes at the edge of a shadow are really due tothe meeting of the direct rays with those reflected at the edgeof the screen, their intensity ought to depend upon the areaand the curvature of its surface, and the fringes produced bythe back of a razor, for instance, ought to be much more vis-
* It might appear at first sight that one would be able to adapt this theory to the ideas of Newton by introducing the principle of interference, as I have indicated above ; but besides the complication of fundamentalhypotheses and the small probability of any of them, this principle, it ap- pears to me, would lead to consequences which contradict the emissiontheory. M. Arago has remarked that the interposition of a thin transparent plate
at the edge of an opaque body sufficiently narrow to produce interior fringes in its shadow displaces these fringes and shifts them towards the
side [see paper by Arago (Ann. Chim. et Phys.,\., p. 199, 1816)] where is placed the transparent plate. This being so, it follows from the principle of interference that the rays which have traversed the plate have been re- tarded in their path, because the same fringes in each case must correspondto equal intervals between the times of arrival of rays. This inference at once confirms the wave-theory and manifestly contradicts the emissiontheory, in which one is compelled to assume that light travels more rapidlyin dense than in rare media. This objection can be avoided only by substituting for difference of path difference of "fit"; but we lose all that was gained by the principle of interference in thus replacing a sharp idea by a hazy one, a satisfactory
explanation by one which does not aid our understanding of the phenomena ; for one can readily see how two light particles striking the retina at the same point may produce sensations more or less intense, according as the
interval of time which separates two consecutive impacts is sufficient to produce unison or dissonance between the vibrations at the optic nerve;while it is by no means so easy to see how this effect could be producedby a difference of "
fit " between two light particles, or how by simultaneousimpact on the optic nerve they would produce no effect at all when they were in opposite "
fits," even though their mechanical impacts were in perfect unison.
MEMOIRS ON
ible than those produced by the edge; but, using a magnifyingglass at a distance of some centimeters, one detects practically no difference in intensity in these two cases. This testis more easily made by using a steel plate one edge of whichis round throughout a part of its length and sharp through-out the remainder of its length, these two edges lying inthe same straight line. One is thus easily convinced thatthe fringes have the same intensity throughout their entirelength.
26. We know that under large angles of incidence dull sur-faces reflect light almost as well as polished mirrors. This is easily explained either on the emission-theory or on the wavetheory. But although one can understand how difference ofpolish cuts a small figure when the angle of incidence is large,it is not easy to see how the intensity of the reflected light canbe independent of the curvature of the reflecting surface; indeed, it is clear that as the radius of curvature diminishesthe reflected rays will diverge more and more, whatever- betheir angle of incidence.
27. Not only so, but I have convinced myself by anothersimple experiment of the incorrectness of the hypothesis whichI had first adopted, and which I am now opposing. I cut asheet of copper into the shape represented in Fig. 15, andplaced it in a dark room about four meters in front of aluminous point, and examined its shadow with a magnifyingglass. What I observed, on slowly re-ceding, was as follows: When the largefringes produced by each of the verynarrow openings CEE'C' and DFF'D'had spread out into the geometricalshadow of CDFE, which received practically only white light from each sep-arate slit, the interior fringes producedby the meeting of these two pencils oflight showed colors much sharper andFig i 5. purer than the interior fringes of the shadow of ABDO, andwere, at the same time, much brighter. On receding still farther, I noticed that the light diminished throughout thewhole of the shadow of ABFE, but much more rapidly backof EFDC than in the upper part of the shadow, so that therewas one particular instant when the intensity of the light ap94
THE WAVE-THEORY OF LIGHT
peared to be the same above and below, after which the fringes
remained less intense in the lower* part, although their colors were always much purer.
If, now, the only inflected light were that which grazed the
edges of the opaque bodies, the fringes of the upper part oughtto be sharper and ought to show purer colors than those of the lower part ; for* the first are produced by the meeting of two systems of waves which have their centres upon the edges
AC and BD, while the others are formed by the meeting of four systems of waves having their origin at the edges C'E',
CE, DF, DF'; and this would necessarily diminish the differ- ence of intensity between the dark and bright bands, in the
case of homogeneous light, or the purity of the colors, in the
case of white light, because the fringes produced by the rays
reflected and inflected at C'E' and DF would not exactly coincide with those produced by the meeting of rays coming fromCE and D'F'. Now experiment shows, as I have just said, that
exactly the reverse of this is true. One might explain on this same hypothesis how it happens that the shadow of ECDFis much brighter than that of ABDC arising from the double
source of light presented by the two edges of each slit ; but fromthis it would follow that the lower part ought always to be
brighter, and we have just seen that this is not the fact. 28. From the experiments which I have just described it is evident that we cannot attribute the phenomena of diffraction
solely to rays which graze the edge of the body ; but we must, on the contrary, admit that there is an infinitude of other rays
sensibly distant from the body and yet deviated from their
original direction, so as to meet and form these fringes.
29. The spreading out of a pencil of light in passing through
a very narrow opening shows in an even better manner that the
inflection of light occurs at a sensible distance from the edges
* In order that this difference of intensity between the two parts of the shadow shall be as marked as possible, it is necessary that the slits CE aud DF be very narrow as compared with the distance which separates them, and that the sheet of copper should be as far away as possible from the luminous point. [In repeating this experiment, it will be found very convenient to use, in- stead of sheet copper, an unfieed photographic plate : lantern slide is best. The two slits can be cut either with a pocket-knife or, better still, by means of a
dividing engine.] 95
MEMOIRS ON
of the diaphragm. It was in the consideration of this phenomenon that I discovered the error into which I had previouslyfallen. When one brings the edges of two opaque screens veryclose together in front of a luminous point in a dark room, heobserves that the region illuminated by the aperture greatly in-creases. Such screens were Newton's two knife-edges. I shallsuppose, as in his- experiment, that the edges of the apertureare thin and perfectly sharp ; not that this has any effect uponthe phenomena, but simply for making clearer the conclusionwhich is to be drawn. The small number of rays which grazethese sharp edges, being spread out over a rather large area,could produce only an insensible amount of illumination, or, atmost, an exceedingly feeble light, and in the midst of it oneought to see a bright band traced out by the pencil of directrays. This, however, is not the fact ; for white light of almostuniform intensity fills a space much larger than the projectionof the aperture,* and gradually grows weaker, shading into thedark bands of the first order. It was doubtless in order to ac-count for the large amount of light inflected that Newton supposed the action of the body upon rays of light to extend tosensible distances, but this hypothesis will not bear carefulscrutiny.
30. If the expansion of a pencil of light which passes througha narrow opening were brought about by attractive and repulsive forces having their origin at the edges of the aperture, theintensity of these forces, and consequently their effect uponthe light, would necessarily vary with the nature, the mass, andthe surface of the edges of the screen. All forces produced bya body acting at a sensible distance and taking their rise in anyconsiderable extent of its mass or its surface would dependupon the relative positions and upon the number of particlescontained within this sphere of activity, or, what is the samething, upon the shape of the surface. If, then, the phenomenain question are due to the action of such forces, one would ex-pect that, on placing a sharp body opposite a round body, therays of light would be inflected more to the one side than the* The illuminated space increases so rapidly in comparison with the width. of the conical projection of the aperture as the receiving screen recedes fromthe aperture, and likewise when the aperture itself is further withdrawnfrom the luminous point, that by making these two distances sufficiently great one can obtain the same effect with an opening of any size. 96
THE WAVE-THEORY OF LIGHT
other ; but, as I have shown by a very simple experiment, this
is not the fact. I passed a pencil of rays between two steel plates whose vertical edges were brought very close togetherand were carefully straightened throughout their entire length.
A part of each edge was sharp, the rest of it round, and these edges were arranged so that the round portion of one plate cor- responded to the sharp one of the other. Thus, if a sharp edgewere located on the right in the upper part of the opening, an- other was located on the left in the lower part, so that if there
had been any difference in the action of the two edges upon the
rays, I should have noticed it in the relative positions of theupper and lower parts of the bright interval at the middle, andespecially in the fringes in that neighborhood, as they would be
interrupted at the point of passage from the sharp to the roundedge ;. but, on observing them closely, I noted that they wereperfectly straight throughout their entire length, even at the
bright interval in the middle, exactly in the same way as whentwo edges of the same kind are opposed one to the other. Theexperiment may be varied by using plates made of two different substances, but the result* obtained will certainly remain the same.
31. All the experiments which I have tried so far haveshown that the nature of the body interposed has in otherrespects no more influence upon the inflection of light than is exerted by the mass or the shape of the two edges. I shall
cite only one experiment, in which I have taken every precaution necessary to determine the correctness of this principle,
which, indeed, is already well established by the precedingexperiment.
I covered an unsilvered mirror with a layer of India inkspread over a thin layer of paper, forming together a thicknessof one-tenth of a millimeter. With a sharp point I traced twoparallel lines, and then carefully removed from between these two lines the paper and the India ink which adhered to the
surface of the glass. This aperture, as measured by the microm-* Messrs. Berthollet and Mains found a long while ago that the nature
of the body had no effect upon the diffraction of light. For screens they
employed plates composed of different substances, with edges made up,
for instance, of very dense metal and a piece of ivory ; but they had no means of observation so convenient and accurate iis mine, and consequently one might suspect that some small difference might have escaped them. G 97
MEMOIRS ON
eter, was 1.17 mm. I then placed opposite each other twocopper cylinders, each having a diameter of 14.5 mm., and bymeans of a graduated wedge I made the interval between thesecylinders also 1.1? mm. The cylinders, placed alongside theblackened glass, were at a distance of 4.015 m. from the lumi-nous point, and at a distance of 1.663 m. from the micrometer.I then measured the size of the fringes produced by these twoopenings, and found that they were absolutely the same. Thefollowing are the results of the two observations made withwhite light : The distance between the darkest point ~\ mm.of the two dark bands of the first I First reading, 1.49order at the point of separation of [Second reading, 1.49the brownish red from the violet . J The interval between the two fringes 1 Firgt reading> 3.33of the second order at the point of Y Second reading) 3>22separation of red and green . '
It is hardly possible that two sets of circumstances shoulddiffer more than these as regards the mass and the nature ofthe edges of the aperture. In the one case there is a singlelayer of India ink producing the fringes, for the glass to whichit adheres completely fills the aperture ; in the other case wehave two massive cylinders of copper, 14.5 mm. in diameter,giving us an aperture whose edges have very considerablemasses and areas, but we observe 110 difference in the expansion of the pencil of light. 32. It is therefore certain that the phenomena of diffractiondo not at all depend upon the nature, the mass, or the shape ofthe body which intercepts the light,* but only upon the size ofthe intercepting body or upon the size of the aperture throughwhich it passes. We must, therefore, reject any hypothesiswhich assigns these phenomena to attractive and repulsive* This is so, at least provided one does not consider the shadow too closeup to the edge of the screen, or provided the surface grazed by the rays oflight has not too large an area compared with this distance ; for in thiscase it may happen that the reflected rays sensibly affect the phenomenonas, for instance, occurs when the surface grazed by the rays is a planemirror of one or two decimeters in size and when one observes the fringesat a short distance. Besides, there would then be successive diffractionsover an area too considerable for one to neglect.
THE WAVE-THEORY OF LIGHT
forces whose action extends to a distance from the body as great as that at which rays are inflected. We are equallyunable to admit that diffraction is caused by a shallow atmosphere which has the same thickness as the sphere of activity
of these forces, and whose refractive index differs from that ofthe neighboring medium ; for this second hypothesis, like thefirst, would lead us.'to think that the inflection of light oughtto vary with the form and the nature of the edge of the screen, and ought not to be the same, for instance, at the edge and at the back of a razor. Now, on the emission-theory it is impossible to explain in any other manner the expansion of a beam of
light passing through a narrow opening, and this expansion is a well-established fact.* Consequently, the phenomena of dif- fraction cannot be explained on the emission-theory.

