---
title: "2014"
# heading: "The evolution of Superphysics"
#date: 2022-08-14
weight: 14
description: "We list the events in the evolution of Superphysics in 2015"
image: "/covers/2014.png"
author: Juan
---


Date | Notes
--- | ---
Jan 1 | I started writing papers after failing to get research scholarship to Japan and Australia. I started applying for scholarships after getting [low-level samadhi in 2007](https://henrosan.blogspot.com/2007/10/salvation-versus-liberation.html) where I realized how the universe was structured from a subject-object perspective. I got that samadhi after 3 years' strict discipline in the Hindu-Buddhist system after dropping Catholicism like a hot potato in 2004 -- the best thing I ever did! If I never freed my mind from Western dogma, I would never have had samadhi. 
March 30 | I started publishing my personal research papers on [Wordpress](https://socioecons.wordpress.com/) after failing to get them published in Economics journals. 
Apr 4 | I was planning to call my proposed economic science, based on Adam Smith, as "Socionomics" but [it was already taken](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/socionomics.asp). "Smithonomics" would be too limiting and dogmatic. So I chose a temporary name as 'Socio-economics'.
Aug 30 | I realized no academic-economist has read **all** of Adam Smith's works as to understand and absorb all of his ideas. Instead, they believe Samuelson's interpretation of Smith, which is really opposite of what Smith was advocating. So I started simplifying the entire [Wealth of Nations](/research/smith/wealth-of-nations) this August. It took me 1 whole month just to simplify Book 1 word by word, so I assume I can finish the whole thing by December. 