---
title: "Lemma 10-11"
description: "We simplify Lemma 7-9 of Principia Mathematica by Isaac Newton"
author: Newton
draft: true
image: "/covers/principia.jpg"
---




## LEMMA 10

The spaces which a bodij describes by any finite force urging it, whether that force is determined and immutable, or is continually augmented or continually diminished, are in the very beginning of the motion one to the other in the duplicate ratio of the times.

Let the times be represented by the lines AD, AE, and the velocities generated in those times by the ordinates DB, EC.

The spaces described with these velocities will be as the areas ABD, ACE.
described by those
ordinates, that is, at the very beginning of the motion (by
the duplicate ratio of the times AD, AE.

### Corollary 1

The errors of bodies describing similar parts of similar figures in proportional times, are nearly if so be these as the squares of the times in which they are generated by any equal forces similarly applied to the bodies, and measured by the distances of the bodies from those places of the similar figures, at which, without the action of those forces, the bodies would have arrived in those proportional times.


### Corollary 2

But the errors that are generated by proportional forces, similarly applied to the bodies at similar parts of the similar figures, are as the forces and the squares of the times 


#### Corollary 3

The same thing is to be understood of
any spaces whatsoever
described by bodies urged with different forces all which, in the very be-
g nning of the motion, are as the forces and the squares of the times conjunctly.

#### Corollary 4

The forces are as the spaces described in the very beginning of the motion directly, and the squares of the times inversely.

#### Corollary 5

The squares of the times are as the spaces described directly, und the forces inversely.


### SCHOLIUM

If in comparing indetermined quantities of different sorts one with another, any one is said to be as any other directly or inversely, the meaning is, that the former is augmented or diminished in the same ratio with

If any one is said to be as any other
the latter, or with its reciprocal.
two or more directly or inversely, the meaning is, that the first is aug
mented or diminished in the ratio compounded of the ratios in which the
augmented or diminished. As
directly,
directly, and D inversely, the mean
or
in the same ratio with B X C
diminished
augmented
others, or the reciprocals of the others, are
if
A
ing
X
is
is,
-jj-,
said to be as
A
that
that
is
is
B
and
to say, that
A
and
-
C
arc one to the other in a given ratio.

## LEMMA 11

The evanescent subtense of the angle of contact, in all curves which at the point of contact have a finite curvature, is ultimately in the duplicate rati ) of the subtense of the conterminate arc.


#### Case 1 

Let
- AB is the arc
- AD is the tangent
- BD is the subtense of the angle of contact perpendicular on the tangent,
- AB is the subtense of the arc.

Draw BG perpendicular to the subtense AB, and AG to the tangent AD, meeting in G. Then let the points D, B, and G. approach to the points d, b, and g, and suppose J
to be the ultimate intersection of the lines BG, AG,
;
when the points D, B, have come
to
A.

GJ may be less than any assignable.
But (from the nature of the circles passing through
2
the points A, B, G, A, b, g,)
X BD, and
that the distance
A6 2
= Ag X bd
the ratios
sumed of
AE
= AG
and therefore the ratio of AB 2 to Ab 2 is compounded oi
But because GJ may be as
of AG to Ag, and of Ed to bd.
less
such as to
;
AG
to Ag may be
length than any assignable, the ratio of
from the ratio of equality by less than any assignable
differ
and therefore the ratio of AB 2 to Ab 2 may be such as to differ
from the ratio of BD to bd by less than any assignable difference. There
2
2
fore, by Lem. I, the ultimate ratio of AB to Ab is the same with tho ul
difference
;
timate ratio of
BD
to bd.
Q.E.D.
BD be inclined to AD in any given an*r1 and the
ultimate ratio of BD to bd will always be the same as before, and there
fore the same with the ratio of AB to Ab


### CASE 2

Now let BD be inclined to AD in any given angle and the ultimate ratio of BD to bd will 

is determined by any other
given point,
nevertheless the angles D, d, being determined by the
we suppose the angle
converges to a
condition whatever
same law,
101
will
;
always draw nearer
to
equality, arid approach nearer to
each other than by any assigned difference, and therefore, by Lem. I, will at
bd arc in the same ratio to each
and therefore the lines
lust be* equal
BD
;
;
Q.E.D.
other as before.
AD, Ad, the arcs AB, Ab, and
become
ultimately equal to the chords AB, Ab their
BC, be,
as the subtenses BD, bd.
become
will
ultimately
squares

### Corollary 2

Their squares are also ultimately as the versed sines of the arcs,

For those versed
bisecting the chords, and converging to a given point.


### Corollary 3

Therefore since the tangents
1.
their sines,
}
sines are as the subtenses


### Corollary 4

And
3.
BD,
bd.
therefore the versed sine
in the duplicate ratio of the
is
time in which a body will describe the arc with a given velocity.
The rectilinear triangles ADB, Adb are
in
the triplicate ratio of the sides AD, Ad,
ultimately
and in a sesquiplicate ratio of the sides DB, db ; as


### Corollary 5

being in the ratio compounded of the sides
Ad
AD
to
c
DB,
also the triangles ABC, Abe
are ultimately in the triplicate ratio of the sides BC, be.
What I call the sesquiplicate ratio is the subduplicate
and of
to db.
So
of the triplicate, as being
compounded of the simple
and subduplicate ratio.
COR. 5. And because DB, db are ultimately paral-
lei and in the duplicate ratio of the lines AD, Ad, the
j
g
ADB, Adb will be (by the nature of the para
and the segments
of
the
rectilinear
two
thirds
bola)
triangles ADB, Adb
And
thence
those areas
be
one
third
of
the
same
Ab
will
AB,
triangles.
ultimate curvilinear areas
and those segments will be in the triplicite ratio as well of the tangents
AD, Ad, as of the chords and arcs AB, AB.

## SCHOLIUM

The angle of contact to be neither infinitely greater nor infinitely less than the angles of contact made by cir
is neither 
cles and their tangents
that is, that the curvature at the point
A
;
infinitely small
nitude.
For
nor infinitely great, or that the interval AJ is of a finite mag
3
in which case no circle can be drawn
may be taken as
DB
AD
:
through the point A, between the tangent
AD
and the curve AB, and
therefore the angle of contact will be infinitely less than those of circles.
5
4
8
And by a like reasoning, if
be made successfully as

we
shall
have a
proceeding in itifini-
infinitely less than the pre-
series of angles of contact,
tum, wherein every succeeding
term


DB
be
made
successively as
AD
1
2
AD|, AD^, AD], AD|
we shall have another infinite series of angles of contact, the first
which is of the same sort with those of circles, the second infinitely
ceding.

and every succeeding one
infinitely greater than the preceding.
of these angles another series of intermediate angles
be interposed, proceeding both ways in infinitum. wherein
But between any two
of contact
may
every succeeding angle shall be infinitely greater or infinitely less than the
2
3
and
there were interposed
As if between the terms
preceding.
AD
AD
the series
AD
f,
ADy, AD
9
4 ,
AD|, AD?, AD|,
again, between any two angles of this
may
angles
series,
7
1
AD^ AD^, AD^

a new series of intermediate
be interposed, differing from one another by infinite intervals.
Nor is nature confined to any bounds.
Those things which have been demonstrated
of curve lines, and the
which they comprehend, may be easily applied to the curve su-
and contents of solids. These Lemmas are premised to avoid the
euperfices
perfices
tediousness of deducing perplexed demonstrations ad absurdnm, according
For demonstrations are more
to the method of the ancient geometers.
contracted by the method of indivisibles but because the hypothesis of
indivisibles seems somewhat harsh, and therefore that method is reckoned
:
geometrical, I chose rather to reduce the demonstrations of the follow
ing propositions to the first and last sums and ratios of nascent and evane
scent quantities, that is, to the limits of those sums and ratios
and so to
less
;
For hereby
premise, as short as I could, the demonstrations of those limits.
the same thing is performed as by the method of indivisibles
and now
;
those principles being demonstrated, we may use them with more safety.
Therefore if hereafter I should happen to consider quantities as made up of
particles, or
(lerstood to
curve lines for right ones, I would not be un-
not the
indivisibles, but evanescent divisible quantities
should use
mean
little
:
sums and ratios of determinate parts, but always the limits of sums and
and that the force of such demonstrations always depends on the
ratios
method laid down in the foregoing Lemmas.
;
Perhaps it may be objected, that there is no ultimate proportion, of
evanescent quantities because the proportion, before the quantities have
But
vanished, is not the ultimate, and when they are vanished, is none.
;
by the same argument,
it may be
alledged, that a body arriving at a cer
tain place, and there stopping has no ultimate velocity = because the velo
when
city, before the body comes to the place, is not its ultimate velocity
ut the answer is easy; for by the ultimate ve
it has arrived, is none
;
i
locity is meant that with which the body is moved, neither before it arrives
at its last place and the motion ceases, nor after, but at the very instant it
arrives
;
that
is,
that velocity with which the body arrives at its last place,
And in like manner, by the ultimate ra
ceases.
and with which the motion
tio
of evanescent quantities
is to
Le understood the ratio of the
ijuantitieaSEC.
OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
II.]
103
In
not before they vanish, nor afterwards, but with which they vanish.
manner the first ratio of nascent quantities is that with which they begin
like
And the first or last sum is that with which they begin and cease
There is a limit which the ve
be (or to be augmented or diminished).
motion
the
of
at
the
end
may attain, but not exceed. This is the
locity
to be.
to
And there is the like limit in all quantities and pro
ultimate velocity.
And since such limits are certain and
cease to be.
and
that
portions
begin
definite, to
whatever
determine the same
is
is
a problem strictly geometrical.
But
to use in determining and de
geometrical we may be allowed
monstrating any other thing that
is
likewise geometrical.
may also be objected, that if the ultimate ratios of evanescent quan
and so all
tities are given, their ultimate magnitudes will be also given
It
:
quantities will consist of indivisibles, which is contrary to what Euclid
has demonstrated concerning incommensurables, in the 10th Book of his
Elements. But this objection is founded on a false supposition. For
those ultimate ratios with which quantities vanish are not truly the ratios
of ultimate quantities, but limits towards which the ratios of quantities
decreasing without limit do always converge and to which they approach
nearer than by any given difference, but never go beyond, nor in effect attain

This thing will appear
the quantities are diminished in wfinitum.
more evident in quantities infinitely great. If two quantities, whose dif
to, till
given, be augmented in infin&um, the ultimate ratio of these
but it does not from
quantities will be given, to wit, the ratio of equality
thence follow, that the ultimate or greatest quantities themselves, whose
ference
is
;
ratio that
is,
will be given.

Ultimate and evanescent quantities mean quantities that become more diminished without end.
