+++
title= "Lemma 3"
image= "/covers/principia.jpg"
description= ""
linkb= "/research/newton/principia/"
linkbtext= "Index"
linkf= "/research/newton/principia/"
linkftext= "Index"
icon= "/icons/newton.png"
draft= true
+++

## LEMMA 3

Let PQR be a spiral cutting all the radii SP, SO, SR, etc. in equal angles. Draw the right line PT touching the spiral in any point P, and cutting the radius SQ in T. Draw PO, QO perpendicular to the spiral, and meeting in, O, and join SO. If the points P and Q approach and coincide, the angle PSO will become a right angle and the ultimate ratio of the rectangle TQ x 2PS to PQ2 will be the ratio of equality

From the right angles OPQ, OQR, subduct the equal angles SPQ, SQR, and there remain the equal angles OPS, OQS.

Therefore a circle which passes through the points OSP
will pass also 
Let the points
Q.
through the point
and Q, coincide, and
P
this circle will touch the spiral in the place
PQ, and
of coincidence
Therefore OP will become a diameter of
perpendicularly.
and the angle OSP, being in a semi-circle, becomes a right
this circle,
one.
Q.E.1).
Draw
SE
Q,D,
will be as follows
PD
to
will therefore cut the
OP
right line
to
PO
2PS.
perpendicular to
:
PO
as
Whence
TO
to
2PO
PO
2
PD
to
;
as
OP, and the ultimate ratios of the lines
and
or PS to PE, or 2PO to 2PS
TS
and, ex cequo pertorbatt, to
becomes equal
to
TO X 2PS.

## PROPOSITION 15. THEOREM 12

TO to PO as PO

If the density of a medium in each place thereof be recipr on iJl y as the distance of the places from an immovable centre, aud the centripetal force be in the duplicate ratio of the density that a body mny revolve in a spiral which cuts all the radii drawn from that centre in a given angle.

Suppose every thing to be as in the foregoing Lemma, and produce SO to V so that SV
may be equal to SP. In any time let a body, in a resisting
PO, and medium, describe the
least arc
in double the time the least arc
PR

and the decrements of those arcs arising from
the resistance, or their differences from the
arcs which would be described in a non-resist
ing medium in the same times, will be to each
other as the squares of the times in which
they
are generated
therefore the decrement of the
;288
arc
the fourth part of the decrement of the arc PR.
Whence also
QSr be taken equal to the area PSQ, the decrement of the arc
is
if the area
PQ
will be equal to half the lineola Rr ; and therefore the force of resist
ance and the centripetal force are to each other as the lineola
jRrandTQ
which they generate
which the body
Book
same time.
P
TQ, which
the lineola
I)
in the
urged in
is
is
is
Because the centripetal force with
2
reciprocally as SP , and (by Lem. X,
generated by that force, is in a ratio
and the duplicate ratio of the time
described (for in this case I neglect the resistance,
as being infinitely less than the centripetal force), it follows that
X
2
SP 2 that is (by the last Lemma),
X SP, will be in a duplicate ra
compounded
of the ratio of this force
which the arc PQ,
in
is
TQ
fPQ
,
of the time, and therefore the time
city of the body, with which the arc
tio
is
PQ
PQ
as
X v/SP
PQ,
is
and the velo
1
-p or
that
,
is,
in the subduplicate ratio of
SQ
in the subduplicate ratio of
reciprocally.
are as the describing velocities to each other
QR
Now
;
SP reciprocally.
QR
And, by a like reasoning, the velocity with which the arc
is
;
described in that time, as
is described,
those arcs
and
PQ
that
is,
subdu
in the
SQ
SQ
to SP, or as
to x/SP X SQ; and, because of the
is to
equal angles SPQ, SQ? , and the equal areas PSQ, QSr, the arc
the arc Qr as
to SP.
Take the differences of the proportional conse
plicate ratio of
PQ
SQ
PQ
VSP
SQ
will be to the arc Rr as
to SP
X ~SQ~,
quents, and the arc
or ^VQ.
For the points P and
the
ultimate
ratio
SP
of
coinciding,
Q
X SQ
the arc
to
|VQ
PQ arising
the ratio of equality.
is
from the
Because the decrement of
resistance, or its double
Rr,
is
as the resistance
and the square of the time conjunctly, the resistance will be
&Sp-^r
*
1
But
PQ
was
to
Rr
as
SQ
-VQ
and
SQ
or ns
to | OS.
coincide also, and the angle
Therefore
:
\J
the density of the
conjunc-tly.
For the
ETp^TsP-
because of the similar triangles
i
OS --
y
X ol
medium
in
PVQ
poillts
p
and
is
as the resistance, that
P and
a coincidin &
to
is,
-VQ
as
the duplicate ratio of the velocity
ratio of the velocity, namely, the ratio
- =
1
Let the spiral be given, and because of the given ratio of
;
in
P
OP
in the ratio of
^5, and there will remain the density of the medium in P. as 7^5
Ur
OA
medium
as
becomes a right one; and,
PVQ, PSO, PQ. becomes
Subduct the duplicate
density of the
op.
becomes
|VQ, and thence Jr
SSaTXToD
X oJr
vst
-OS
pWxsvxSQ,
SP
to
X
will be as
~-p.
OS
to
OS
X fei
OP,
the
Therefore in a medium whose
will re
density is reciprocally as SP the distance from the centre, a body
volve in this spiral.
Q.E.D.
The
any place P, is always the same wherewith a
body in a non-resisting medium with the same centripetal force would re
volve in a circle, at the same distance SP from the centre.
COR. 2. The density of the medium, if the distance SP be given, is as
COR.
1.
velocity in
OS
OS
TTp,
may
but
if that distance is
^
^5.
And
thence a spiral
be fitted to any density of the medium.
COR.
3.
force of the resistance in any place P is to the centripetal
same place as |OS to OP. For those forces are to each other
The
force in the
as
not given, as
iRr and TQ,
^VQ x PQ
or as
1
^-^~-
ol%,
iPQ 2
and
^-,
ol
that
is,
as
iVQ
and PQ,
|OS and OP. The spiral therefore being given, there is given the pro
portion of the resistance to the centripetal force and, vice versa, from that
proportion given the spiral is given.
or


### Corollary 4

Therefore the body cannot revolve in this spiral, except where

Let:

-  the re
is less than half the centripetal force.
the force of resistance
made equal to half the centripetal force, and the spiral will co
incide with the right line PS, and in that right line the body will descend
to the centre with
a velocity that is to the velocity, with which it was
in
the
case of the parabola (Theor. X, Book I), the descent
proved before,
sistance be
would be made in a non-resisting medium, in the subduplicate ratio of
And the times of the descent will be here recip
unity to the number two.
as
the
and
therefore given.
velocities,
rocally

### Corollary 5

because at equal distances
is the same in the
from the centre the velocity
PQ,R as it is in the right line SP, and
the length of the spiral is to the length of the
right line PS in a given ratio, namely, in the
spiral
ratio of
OP
to
OS
;
the time of the descent in
the spiral will be to the time of the descent in
the right line SP in the same given ratio, and
therefore given.

### Corollary 6

If
from the centre
S,
with any two
given intervals, two circles are described
;
and
these circles remaining, the angle which the
spiral makes with the
PS be any how changed the number of revolutions which the
radius&quot;
body can
;
complete in the space between the circumferences of those
round in the spiral from one circumference
ths tangent of the angle which the
spiral
19
circles,
going
PS
to another, will be as
makes with the radius
or
7^,
Ok5
PS
;
as
OP
the time of the same revolutions will be as
that
-^,
Uo
is,
as the secant of the
same angle, or reciprocally as the density of the medium.
COR. 7. If a body, in a medium whose density is reciprocally as the dis
tances of places from the centre, revolves in any curve AEB about that
centre,
and cuts the
B
first
radius
AS
in the
same
did before in A, and that with a
that
shall
be to its first velocity in
re
velocity
in
a
ciprocally
subduplicate ratio of the distances
angle in
as
it
A
from the centre (that is, as AS to a mean propor
tional between AS and BS) that body will con
tinue to describe innumerable similar revolution?
BFC, CGD, &c., and by its intersections will
distinguish the radius
AS
into parts AS, BS, CS, DS, &c., that are con
But the times of the revolutions will be as the
tinually proportional.
perimeters of the orbits
AEB, BFC, CGD,
&c., directly, and the velocities
3
C
at the beginnings A, B,
And
2
CS&quot;
&quot;.
of those orbits inversely
proportionals
AS
142
2
,
BS
CS 2
2
,
*
2
;
that
BS%
that
is
as
3
AS % BS %
the whole time in which the body will arrive at the centre,
time of the first revolution as the sum of all the continued
will be to the
AS
;
is,
as the first
or as f
AS
to
term
AB
,
going on ad itifinitum,
AS
i 2
to the first
term
3
to the difference of the
Whence
very nearly.
two
first
the whole time
AS
may
2
be
easily found.
From
may be deduced, near enough, the motions of
density is either uniform, or observes any other
From the centre S, with intervals SA, SB, SC, &c., con
assigned law.
and suppose the time of
tinually proportional, describe as many circles
two
of those circles, in the
of
the
the revolutions between
any
perimeters

### Corollary 8

bodies in
hence also
mediums whose
;
medium whereof we treated, to be to the time of the revolutions between
the same in the medium proposed as the mean density of the proposed me
dium between those circles to the mean density of the medium whereof we
between the same circles, nearly and that the secant of the angle
which the spiral above determined, in the medium whereof we treated,
cuts the radius AS, is in the same ratio to the secant of the angle in which
the new spiral, in the proposed medium, cuts the same radius and also
that the number of all the revolutions between the same two circles is nearly
If this be done every where between every
as the tangents of those angles.
treated,
:
in
:
And by
the motion will be continued through all the circles.
means one may without difficulty conceive at what rate and in what
time bodies ought to revolve in any regular medium.
two
this
circles,

SEC. IY.1
291

### Corollary 9 

Although these motions becoming eccentrical should be performed in spirals approaching to an oval figure, yet, conceiving the several revolutions of those spirals to be at the same distances from each and to approach to the centre by the same degrees as the spiral above other,
we may
described,
how
also understand
the motions of bodies
may
be per
formed in spirals of that kind.
