---
title: Corollaries 3-4"
image: "/covers/principia.jpg"
description: "Newton enumerates 2 Corollaries"
icon: "/icons/newton.png"
draft: true
---


## COROLLARY 3

{{< quote >}}
The quantity of motion collected by adding the motions directed towards the same parts, and the difference of those that are directed to contrary parts, suffers no change from the action of bodies among themselves.
{{< /quote >}}

Law 3 says that action and reaction are equal. By Law 2, they produce in the motions equal changes towards opposite parts. 

Therefore if the motions are directed towards the same parts.

For action and

fore,
by
Law
site parts.
whatever
is
II,
added
to the
motion of the preceding body will be subducted
so that the sum will be the same
from the motion of that which follows ;

If the bodies meet, with contrary motions, there will be an
equal deduction from the motions of both and therefore the difference of the motions directed towards opposite parts will remain the same.


A with two parts of velocity is triple of a

Thus if a spherical body spherical body B which follows in the same right line with ten parts of
will be to that of B as 6 to 10.

velocity, the motion of

Suppose,
A
then, their motions to be of 6 parts and of 10 parts, and the sum will be
16 parts.
Therefore, upon the meeting of the bodies, if
acquire 3, 4,
or 5 parts of motion, B will lose as many and therefore after reflexion

B with 7, 6, or 5 parts; the
If the body of 16 parts as before.
acquire 9,
12
and
after
or
of
therefore
motion,
10, 11,
meeting proceed with
parts
has got,
15, 16, 17, or 18 parts, the body B, losing so many parts as
will either proceed with 1 part, having lost 9, or stop and remain at rest,
will proceed With
9,
10, or 11 parts,
and
A
sum remaining always
A
as having lost its whole progressive motion of 10 parts
or it will go back whole motion, but (if 1 may so say)
one part more; or it will go back with 2 parts, because a progressive mo And so the sums of the Conspiring motions
tion of 12 parts is taken off.
otions 17
1
and
15 ,1, or 16-1-0, and the differences of the contrary
with
1
part, having not only lost
its
i
;OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
16 parts, as they were before tie meeting
But, the motions being known with whicli
the bodies proceed after reflexion, the velocity of either will be also known, by taking the velocity after to the velocity before reflexion, as the motion

As in the last case, where the motion of tho after is to the motion before. 

[S
2, will always be equal
and reflexion of the bodies.
to
A
was of
body
parts before reflexion and of IS parts after, and the
velocity was of 2 parts before reflexion, the velocity thereof after reflexion
will be found to be of 6 parts
parts of motion before
by saying, as the
to 18 parts after, so are 2 parts of velocity before reflexion to (5 parts after.
But if the bodies are cither not spherical, or, moving in different right
;
impinge obliquely one upon the lines, other,
we
and their mot ons after
re
determine the position
of the plane that touches the concurring bodies in the point of concourse
then the motion of each body (by Corol. II) is to be resolved into two, one
flexion are required, in those cases
are
first to


This done, be
perpendicular to that plane, and the other parallel to it.
cause the bodies act upon each other in the direction of a line perpendicu
lar to this plane, the parallel motions are to be retained the same after
and to the perpendicular motions we are to assign
towards
the contrary parts in such manner that the sum
equal changes
of the conspiring and the difference of the contrary motions may remain
reflexion as before

the same as before.

From such kind of reflexions also sometimes arise
own
the circular motions of bodies about their
cases
to
which
I
do not consider in what follows
;
But
centres.
and
it
these are
would be too tedious
demonstrate every particular that relates to this subject.

## COROLLARY 4

{{< quote >}}
The common centre of gravity of two or more bodies does not alter its state of motion or rest by the actions of the bodies among themselves. Therefore, the common centre of gravity of all bodies acting on each other (excluding outward actions and impediments) is either at rest, or moves uniformly in a straight line.
{{< /quote >}}

If two points proceed with a uniform motion in straight  lines, and their distance be divided in a given ratio, the dividing point will be either at rest, or proceed uniformly in a straight line.

This is demonstrated by Lem. 23 and its Corollary, when the points are moved in the same plane, and when they are not moved.

Therefore if any number of bodies move uniformly in straight lines, the common centre of gravity of any two of them is either at rest, or proceeds uniformly in a right line because the line which connects the centres of those two bodies so moving is divided at after in

that common centre in a given ratio.

In like manner the common of those two and that of a third
body will be either at rest or formly in aright line because at that centre the distance centre
moving uni 
1
etween th

common centre of the two bodies, and the centre of this last, is divided in In like manner the common centre of these three, and of a
a given ratio.
fourth body, is either at
the distance between the
of the fourth
is
rest, or
moves uniformly in a right
line
;
because
common
centre of the three bodies, and the centre
there also divided in a given ratio, and so on
m itifinitum.
Therefore, in a system of bodies where there is neither any mutual action
among themselves, nor any foreign force impressed upon them from without,
and which consequently move uniformly in right lines, the common centre of
gravity of them all is either at rest or moves uniformly forward in a right line.
Moreover, in a system of two bodies mutually acting upon each other,
and the common centre of
gravity
of both are reciprocally as the bodies, the relative motions of those bodies,
whether of approaching to or of receding from that centre, will be equal
among themselves. Therefore since the changes which happen to motions
since the distances between their centres
are equal and directed to contrary parts, the common centre of those bodies,
by their mutual action between themselves, is neither promoted nor re
tarded, nor suffers
any change as
to its state of
motion or
rest.


But in a system of several bodies, because the common centre of gravity of any two
acting mutually upon each other suffers no change in its state by that ac
and much less the common centre of gravity of the others with which
tion
:
that action does not intervene
;
but the distance between those two centres
common
centre of gravity of all the bodies into parts re
is
the total sums of those bodies whose centres they
to
ciprocally proportional
two centres retain their state of motion or
those
while
therefore
and
are
divided by the
:
common centre of all does also retain its state it is manifest that
common centre of all never suffers any change in the state of its mo
rest,
the
xhe
:
tion or rest
from the actions of any two bodies between themselves.
But
in such & system all the actions of the bodies among themselves either hap
pen between two bodies, or are composed of actions interchanged between
some two bodies and therefore they do never produce any alteration in
;
the comrrv n centre of alias to its state of motion or rest.
that centre,
tiince
when the
Oilier is nt rest or
:v\&amp;gt;U7ithst?nding
Wherefore
bodies do not act mutually one upon another,
moves uniformly forward
in
some right
line, it will,
the mutual actions of the bodies
among themselves, always
or of proceeding uniformly in a right
either of rest,
jAY-jevere in its state,
it is forced out of this state
unless
liiv,,
by the action of some power im-
And therefore the same law
whole
the
without
from
system.
upon
prev^-d
of many bodies as in one single body,
place in a system consisting
with wsgard to their persevering in their state of motion or of rest. For
the pi \\jressive motion, whether of one single body, or of a whole system of
take*
1
bodies
us
always to be estimated from the motion of the centre of gravity.

